Melissodes Latreille is a common genus of New World bees in the tribe Eucerini that range across North America, Central America, and South America (Laberge, 1956a, 1956b, 1961, 1963). The genus, currently consisting of 5 subgenera (Freitas et al., 2023) and 129 species, ranks second largest in its tribe (Wright et al., 2020) and occupies one of the largest ranges of a non-cosmopolitan Eucerini. The majority of Melissodes reside in North America with all collections of members from Eumelissodes (the largest subgenus), Callimelissodes (the third largest subgenus), and Apomelissodes (tied for the smallest subgenus with Ecplectica) occurring on this continent. However, the remaining two subgenera, Ecplectica and Melissodes s.s., have both been collected in South America; the former most abundantly found in this region (Wright et al., 2020). With this genus falling into Eucerini, members of Melissodes exhibit the tribe’s distinctly marked sexual diamorphic characteristics. This being females are often larger and much more robust than their male counterparts (Laberge, 1956a, 1956b, 1961), bear scopae on their hind tibiae and basitarsi (Laberge, 1961), typically have more hamuli than males (Laberge, 1956a, 1956b, 1961), bear 12 antennal segments (10 of these counting as the flagella), and exhibit fairly small antennae. In addition to what can be inferred by the inverse of comparative characteristics above, males of Melissodes differ from females most distinctly in that their antennae are extremely elongated (in repose, often reaching much farther than the posterior margin of the mesoscutum; exceptions occur, see species historically considered Tachymelissodes or Psilomelissodes), the hind tibiae and basitarsi lack of scopae, and the antennae are composed of 13 antennal segments (12 of which account for the flagellae). These secondary sex-specific characters (specifically the antennal differences) are shared among most members of Eucerini and more genus-specific sexual diamorphisms are presented below. 
The genera that comprise Eucerini have been notoriously difficult to identify, many of which have convoluted and incredibly complex taxonomic histories (see more in “Taxonomy and Phylogeny), but Melissodes differ largely from all other members of the tribe in a few key and readily recognizable characters. Currently, all members of Melissodes have anteriorly narrowed tegulae that are often either straight or concave on the lateral margin, whereas all other genera of Eucerini, apart from Martinapis, have rounded tegulae (Laberge, 1961; Zavortink & Laberge, 1976; Mitchener, 2007). While this general trait is determinative of Melissodes (coupleted with features that separated Melissodes from Martinapis), other characteristics that are often more noticeable have specific use-cases when identifying Melissodes from other Eucerini; such characters are detailed below in “Similar Taxa” as well as “Taxonomy and Phylogeny". 
While not applicable to all species, many taxa within Melissodes are documented as not only important pollinators in natural settings, but also show significance in agricultural pollination (Wright et al., 2020). For example, M. agilis, a known and prolific pollinator of Helianthus, is noted by Parker (1981) as being able to set 4.9 to 10.9 times as many seeds on male sterile sunflower varieties than that of the western honey bee. Furthermore, M. communis and M. tepaneca, both of which are polylectic species, are known as significant pollinators of cotton (Olson et al., 2021; Esquivel et al., 2020), the latter reportedly impacting cotton production by an additional 0.8 to 1.8 grams in comparison to cotton untouched by this species (Esquivel et al., 2020). M. communis has also been found atop 16 crops of agricultural importance, some of which include peanuts (Olson et al., 2021), carrots, alfalfa, squash, black berries, mint, and many others (Hogland, 2026a). A more in-depth treatment of Melissodes diet as well as agricultural significance is presented below in “Flower Records”. 

Description and Identification
In his three-part revision (and an additional paper released in 1963), Laberge (1956a, 1956b, 1961, 1963) treated 129 species of Melissodes, and when adequate material was available, took measurements of body length, metasomal breadth, hamuli count, wing length, and flagellar ratios of both sexes for each species. A generalized summary of these measurements is given for each sex below in an attempt to create a genus level description. Notable species that deviate from the average Melissodes specimen (e.g. males of the historic invalid subgenera Tachymelissodes, Heliomelissodes, and Psilomelissodes) will be noted as exclusions to the generalized genus descriptions. Preceding the descriptions for each sex, a morphometrics section will be given based on the data provided by Laberge (1956a, 1956b, 1961) from each species. Values with ranges (i.e. body length and metasomal breadth) are calculated from taxa with the smallest and largest measurements for the given characteristics. Following each range, the species that contributed to either extreme will be parenthesized. Measurements given by Laberge as means with standard errors (i.e. hamuli count, wing length, and flagellar ratios) will be herein presented as ranges. Ranges of such characteristics are calculated using the upper and lower 95% confidence intervals (CI) of the largest and smallest values and, when necessary, are rounded to the nearest whole number (as in hamuli count). If the lower or upper 95% CI is rounded, then the raw number will also be parenthesized following the species that contributed to the value, for example: (M. melanurus; 9.214883574). Following these morphometrics sections, a generalized description of morphology will be given. These descriptions are derived from the species and subgeneric descriptions of Laberge (1956a, 1956b, 1961) unless cited otherwise. 

Male
Males of Melissodes range between 7mm (M. minusculus & M. melanurus) to 16mm (M. coloradensis) in length and the widest portion of the metasoma ranges from 2mm (M. melanurus, M. paululus, M. brevipyga, M. subagilis, M. druriellus, minusculus, M. tepidus, M. rufodentatus, M. paroselae, and M. clarkiae) to 5.5mm (M. semilupinus, M. coloradensis, M. communis, and M. bimaculatus). Males bear between 9 (M. melanurus; 9.214883574) and 16 (M. bimaculatus; 16.35116306) hamuli, and their wing lengths measure between

The integument is black, differing in most species on the clypeus, which is cream-colored to yellow, although, the clypeus can be partially or entirely black, or apically margined with dark colorations; the labrum, which ranges from entirely black to entirely white (labrum, in many Eumelissodes, is often black with a large pale macula, or is pale and apically margined with dark colorations); the mandibular bases which range from bearing a large pale to yellow macula that covers the entire triangular base to completely black; the apical one-half of the mandibles, which are often rufescent in the apical on-half and usually bear an apicomedial golden macula (although, not always); the eyes, which are variously colored, but often range between green, blue, yellow, and black (although, violet and grayish eyes aren’t incredibly rare); the wing veins, which range from entirely black to reddish yellow; the wing membranes, which range from deeply infumate, to milky, to colorless hyaline; the distitarsi, which are often rufescent to dark brownish red; the legs, which are variously colored and can range from being mostly black (that is, usually apart from the distitarsi), to all segments apart from the coxae appearing bright red (see M. foxi); the terga, which range from being distinctly hyaline apically to entirely opaque black to brownish red; the underside of flagellar segments 2-11, which often range from brownish to reddish orange to yellow, but can be entirely black; the sterna, which can range from reddish or brownish colored apically to colorless or slightly yellowed hyaline; the tibial spurs, which are variously colored, but often range from rufescent brownish, to yellow, to bright reddish orange, to piceous to black; the denticles on terga five through seven, which are often somewhat rufescent (although, this is yet to be formally described); and the tegulae, which range from entirely black, to piceous, to distinctly rufescent or dark reddish brown. Many other undocumented integumental color variants likely exist within males of Melissodes, however, the characters presented above are of the most important integumental traits for identification. 

Male Melissodes structure is incredibly variable, at times, more so than the integumental color, and is used as a very important feature in identification. While not all possible structural variations will be given below due to the incredibly large variability of the genus, a surface-level description pertaining mostly to the diagnostic characters of the genus is outlined. Features of sculpture (e.g. punctuation and microsculptureing) will be omitted from the following genus-level description given the high variation and importance to species-level identification; these characters are instead presented in each species treatment. The descriptions of anatomy will follow the vocabulary used by Laberge (1956a, 1956b, 1961) with parenthesized terminology used by Snodgrass (1910) in his book on the anatomy of the honeybee when applicable. 
Head: The malar space is extremely reduced or entirely absent and the maxillary palpi are usually composed of 4 segments, but sometimes only 3 or up to 5 segments may be (if a fifth present, this segment often reduced). The clypeus is often somewhat protuberant (not nearly to the same extent as those of Thygater or Eucera), protruding beyond the eye in profile view by no more than an eye’s width and usually much less (Mitchener, 2007). However, in profile, the clypeus is noticeably convex and rounded without large protrusion of the supraclypeal area (unlike some Eucera), and not distinctly produced posteriorly to create a lip-shape (unlike those of Simanthedon). Furthermore, ranges in clypeal protrusion within the genus exist as well; in profile, the clypeal protruding ranging from reaching beyond the eye by three-fourths of an eye’s width or slightly more to less than half an eye’s width. The tentorial depressions in the apicolateral corners of the clypeus are well-developed and often black (the base-color of the integument; likely reasons for such coloring are expounded upon below). The galeae, when measuring from the first palpal segment’s base, are usually at most slightly longer than, or equal to, three times the length of the clypeus (as in those of M. fimbriata) but often shorter. The ultimate flagellar segment is always either distally rounded or apically truncated, never is this segment weakened in comparison to the foregoing segments. The antennae are extremely long (Laberge, 1956a, 1956b, 1961), most species, when in repose, with their antennae surpassing the posterior margin of the scutellum (exceptions occur, see species historically considered to be in the currently invalid subgenera of Tachymelissodes and Psilomelissodes). In facial view, the outline of the face is rather dorsally flattened with a conspicuous hump on which the ocelli emerge (Mitchener, 2007). Notably, in this view, the eyes do not protrude above the vertex, but instead start to converge near the anterior margin of the clypeus before distinctly converging near the mandibular bases (Mitchener, 2007). The clypeus is quite broad, often extending from nearly the posterior apex of one eye to the other, leaving a small oculoclypeal area on both lateral margins that always measures less than the smallest diameter of the first flagellar segment and often half this width. The antennae are composed of 13 segments, 11 of which constitute the flagella (as in most Apid bees; Mitchener, 2007). The antennal sockets are positioned near the midline of the eyes (Mitchener, 2007) and the antennal scapes are often fairly narrow in comparison to other Eucerini (such as those of Eucera), in width, often measuring less than, or equal to, one and one-half of the largest width of the second flagellar segment. The first flagellar segment, in most species, is distinctly shorter than the second and sometimes similar in length to, or slightly shorter than, the pedicel; although, often shorter (exceptions occur, see species historically considered to be in the currently invalid subgenera of Tachymelissodes and Psilomelissodes). In general, the remaining flagellar segments are often quite long, most measuring far more than twice (and often much more than three times) their width, apart from the variably lengthened penultimate segment (this segment at minimum, equal to or slightly smaller than, twice its width and never as short as to equal its width; see those of M. ablusus, M. minusculus, and M. clarkiae). In profile view, the mandibles are distally narrower than their base, forming somewhat rounded nearly un-notched, elongated triangular structures (unlike the distally enlarged spoonlike mandibles of Martinapis; Mitchener, 2007). The labrum, when rested, is entirely hidden behind, and lying near perpendicular to, the inner surface of the apical area of the clypeus (unlike the slightly protruded and diagonally angled labra of Thygater or some species of Tetroloniella; Mitchener, 2007). Currently, no studies have yet concerned themselves with examination and documentation of male (or for that matter either sex) Melissodes mouth structures and until a description is presented, all that is known is galeal structure (of which is described above). 
Thorax: Melissodes have three distinct thoracic segments along with a dorsally produced and flattened propodeum (the propodeum representing the first abdominal segment fused with the metathorax. Similar to the descriptions and groupings from that of Snodgrass (1910), these sclerites will fall into four groups: 1) the pronotum (or prothorax from Snodgrass, 1910) consisting of the protergum and propleurum (or, as presented by Snodgrass, the combination of the first scutum and scutellum; however, this phrasing is somewhat unintuitive and given that Melissodes lack the distinct pronotal separation into anterior and posterior halves, this terminology will be omitted), as well as the ventral surface of the propleurum; 2) the mesothorax, consisting of the mesoscutum, scutellum, and mesepisternum (or the episternum and epimerum from Snodgrass, 1910); the metathorax, consisting of the metanotum (or the metatergum from Snodgrass, 1910), and the upper and lower pleural plates; and the propodeum, consisting of the first abdominal segment fused to the metathorax. Given that few known sexual dimorphisms exist in thoracic structure (apart from the length of the metanotum in relation to the length of the dorsal propodeal surface in females of the subgenus Melissodes), a dedicated description of structure that can be applied to both sexes (with notes of the known sexual dimorphism included) will be given below. The legs consist of 9 segments each: the coxa, trochanter, femur, tibia, basitarsus, three mediotarsi, and the distitarsus. The distal most five of these comprise the tarsi, however, as in most Anthophila (Snodgrass, 1910), the basitarsus is extremely enlarged as to appear dissociated with the remaining tarsal segments. The femur of the anterior pair of legs are thin, becoming widest in the basal areas, and noticeably more than three times their width (Mitchener, 2007). However, until a thorough study on Melissodes anatomy is conducted, little more can be said based on results in the literature. The stigma is small, often measuring similar in length, or smaller than, the prestigma (Mitchener, 2007). The fore wings are composed of eleven cells: one costal cell, one median cell, one submedian cell, one anal cell, one marginal cell, three submarginal cells, and three discoidal cells; and the hind wings are composed of three cells and two lobes: one costal cell, one median cell, one submedial cell, one veinal lobe, and one jugular lobe. It is of interest that the posterior margin of the wing along the anal cell is highly chitinious and developed into a vein-colored structure (similar to most Eucerini and somewhat similar to those of Bombus in this regard) as to create a larger and stronger surface of attachment for the hind wing’s hamuli. Given that males and females share incredibly similar wing structure, a dedicated description of wings and their presumed evolutionary history will be presented below. 
Metasoma: The metasoma of male Melissodes consists of seven exposed dorsal segments (terga) and 6 exposed ventral segments (sterna). However, the male terminalia is partially composed of an additional two sterna that connect to the base of the genitalic structures ventrally (S7 & S8). The exposed tergal segments are produced somewhat ventrally in the lateral areas, overlapping the lateral margins of the sterna, the segments appearing as if they wrap around the sides of the metasoma. Ventrally, these lateral overlapping tergal structures reach further medially in their anterior regions than basally, appearing triangular in this view with the tip of this elongate triangle directed posteriorly. The first, second, and sixth sternal margins are usually consistent in structure throughout the genus. However, the third, fourth, and fifth sterna are highly variable, ranging from being slightly concave to broadly convex and hyaline; most males having their margins transverse with only those of Callimelissodes being distinctly convex sternal margins. The sixth sternum is always either medially concave or flat, never outwardly protruding or producing into large lateral flanges. This apical external sternal segment is also incredibly distinct from the preceding plates, its outline appearing fairly triangular with a rounded apex. The fifth, sixth, and seventh terga bear a denticle on either side. The pygidial plate lacks a subapical transverse carina (unlike those of Gaesochiral; Mitchener, 2007) and the seventh sternum bears distinct and often narrowed lateral apodems that reach basally (Laberge, 1956a, 1956b, 1961), and small apical rounded projections (Mitchener, 2007). The eighth sternum is always testaceous, never becoming entirely piceous, and often exhibits distinct lateral apodemes as well as a medial ventral carina. The gonostyli are faintly curved to straight (never distinctly bent or elbowed) and often capitate. The penis valves often have a distinct lateral process that is usually directed and curved basally arising from the ventral surface. Currently, a dedicated anatomical description of external and internal morphology of Melissodes is lacking and therefore, nothing more than what literature has described can be said.

The hair color of Melissodes is incredibly diverse, ranging from entirely black, to incredibly pale with many species bearing ochracous, grayish to cinerous, somewhat rufescent, and yellowed hairs. Given this high variability, a general description in regards to vestiture color would be inappropriate (especially due to each species exhibiting slightly different colorations). Therefore, this section will instead focus on the hair structure, hair locations, and shapes of the distal pale tergal bands (the last character bearing the most taxonomic significance in Laberge’s keys of the foregoing setal traits, and presents itself with the most variation). Melissodes are highly setaceous bees, their hairs appearing fairly simple in structure and completely lacking spatuloplumose hairs (unlike those of Svastra and Epimelissodes; Mitchener, 2007). 
Head: The head hairs are usually quite long on the vertex, in comparison, becoming somewhat shorter on the mandibles and labrum (mandibular and labral hairs sometimes worn off), with the clypeus often maintaining longer hairs of similar length to those on the frons and supraclypeal areas. The supraclypeal area and frons hairs are usually very long and become directed outward just below the basal areas of the antennal sockets as to create an overlapping section of hair medially (although, this character is yet to be documented in the literature). The scapes are usually covered in minute, fine, simple hairs and the hairs on the anterior postocular areas are usually smaller and slightly more appressed than the vertex or clypeal hairs (although, these characters are yet to be documented in the literature). 
Thorax: The thoracic hairs are often long and abundant, shrouding the majority of the surface in fairly simple but often dense setae. A distinct line of pubescence between the anterior margin of the scutellum and posterior margin of the mesoscutum is present. When the general thoracic vestiture is pale but the mesoscutum and scutallum bear dark patches (this is often referred to as the dorsal thoracic dark patch), the described line of hairs are usually the last to become dark. This often results in the dorsal dark thoracic patch becoming separated into the mesoscutal (larger and anterior) and scutellar (smaller and posterior) patches via a line of pale hairs (although, this line is known to become dark when large scutellar and mesoscutal dark patches are confluent). The leg hairs seem to be somewhat less variable among species than those of the preceding and following characters. The males likely bear dense and abundant hairs on the hind basitarsi, this pattern continuing throughout the remainder of the leg segments, but only descriptive morphology of female leg vestiture has been described. However, similar to the structural sections, until a publication revolving around the anatomy of Melissodes presents itself, nothing more can be said concerning general leg setal descriptions (although, setal colorations are given for each species treatment). 
Metasoma: Metasomal vestiture holds some of the most significance in setal identification characteristics. In general, males bear incredibly long and simple stranded hairs on the first tergum that arise from the basal declivous area. The apical area of this tergum ranges from entirely glabrous (often quite common) to entirely obscured due to dense appressed pubescence (see M. bimatris and M. semilupinus). The second tergum is highly variable, often bearing two bands (the distal most band being the most prominent one) each composed of much more complex and feather-like pubescence than those of the basal hairs on the first tergum. The two bands may or may not connect to one another laterally and the interband zone of the second tergum is usually composed of hairs similar in structure to the basal setae of the first tergum. These bands can exhibit a number of different shapes, ranging from the exceedingly thin and transverse distal band of M. communis ssp. communis, to the arched and medially narrowed/interrupted bands of many Eumelissodes or the apical bands of Apomelissodes, to the extremely long hairs of M. pearlusus that can sometimes superficially resemble a confluency between the distal and basal bands (note that not all characters are covered given that an extensive list would be too large to justify). The apical area of the second tergum varies quite a lot amongst the genus as well, ranging between an entirely glabrous surface to dense appressed apical pubescence obscuring the margin across the entire tergum (as in M. bimatris and M. semilupinus). The third tergum is often similar to the second in its variations, although, the basal bands (if present) are incredibly reduced in comparison to the basal band of the second tergum, and the usually (although, not always) fairly wider than the second tergum’s distal pale band. The distal band across the fourth tergum seems to hold little taxonomic significance, as can be seen in Laberge’s (1956a, 1956b, 1961, 1963) keys, and is therefore often described in less detail by the Melissodes revisionist and subsequent authors. From what is common of males and detailed in many of Laberge’s descriptions, the band across the fourth tergum is often positioned closer to the apical margin of the tergum than the distal bands of the preceding segments. The band across the fifth tergum, similar to that of the second, takes many forms; ranging from entirely absent, to medially narrowed or interrupted, to apically or subapically positioned, to entirely complete and extremely distinct (for example, such characters often used, among others, for subspecific identification of M. communis). The sixth and seventh tergal band shapes are usually overlooked in most of Laberge’s (1956a, 1956b, 1961, 1963) descriptions, likely due to the small surface area of the sclerites and somewhat inconsequential effect on identification. Instead, the color of these hairs hold taxonomic significance in some subgeneric separation (of which is explained further in "Taxonomy and Phylogeny”). Similar to the descriptions of the sixth and seventh terga, the sternal hairs are usually described only by their colors rather than structure or the shapes of the bands they create. 


Female
Females of Melissodes are often larger than their male counterparts, ranging from 8mm (M. steransi, M. fumosus, M. illatus, M. verbesinarum, M. brevipygus, M. paululus, and M. melanurus) to 16mm (M. coloradensis, M. communis, M. menuachus, M. semilupinus, M. pallidisignatus) in length, and ranging in greatest metasomal breadth from 2.5mm (M. minusculus, M. stearnsi, and M. verbesinarum) to 6mm (M. semilupinus, M. coloradensis, M. communis, M. dentiventris, M. submenuacha, M. perlusus, and M. bimaculatus). Females bear between 11 (M. lutulentus; 10.6634879384563) and 19 (M. bimaculatus; 18.6869770444575) hamuli, and their wing lengths measure between

The integument is black, differing at the mandibles, which are commonly rufescent in their apical one-half and usually bear an apicomedial golden macula (although, not always); the eyes, which, similar to the males, can range from deep blues, to greens, to yellows, to blacks; the underside of the flagella (often on segments 3-10 and sometimes on the apex of the second), which can range from entirely black, to dark brown, to reddish yellow; the wing membranes, which range from deeply infumate (such as those of M. coloradensis), to colorless hyaline or faintly yellowish; the wing veins, which range from black to brown or reddish in color (these veins, however, are almost never as light as the veins of the lightest males); the distitarsi, which are almost always (if not always) rufescent, the preceding tarsal segments often taking on a reddish hue as well; the remaining leg segments, which can be completely red or dark brownish red (as in the case of M. foxi), or extremely dark brown to black (as in the case for most species); the tibial spurs, which are variable in color but often exhibit some sort of rufescent or yellowish translucent hue, but can be piceous, testaceous, or at times white; the apical margin of the first tergum, which can be entirely opaque to narrowly hyaline (as in most species), to bearing a distinct, somewhat wide hyaline rim with rufescent colorations basal to the translucent or transparent area (as in M. tristis), or broadly hyaline with a large transparent area on the rim of the terga that’s more than one-eighth of the tergum’s length (as in those of M. saponellus and similar species); the remaining terga (2-6) are often completely opaque, but for a few species (M. saponellus, M. vernalis, and M. velutinus), these terga are broadly hyaline apically (somewhat male-like in color); the sterna range from highly rufescent to near orange-colored (quite common in many species) to somewhat piceous to very dark brown or black; and the tegulae, which can range from entirely black or piceous (as in most species), to margined with red or somewhat rufescent throughout the entire integumental surface. Similar to the male description above, many integumental characteristics in relation to color have likely gone undescribed in the current body of literature. However, the characters presented above are prioritized due to their taxonomic significance and formal descriptions. 

Females of Melissodes are considerably variable in regards to structural characteristics, however, it seems as though structural characteristics play a much less important role in identification than integumental color and vestiture. Unfortunately, given that no dedicated anatomical description for Melissodes has been given, only structural characteristics pertinent to identification have been detailed. While many characteristics can be assumed based on comparisons across species treatments (such traits are described below), metasomal, leg, and portions of thoracic structural descriptions are severely lacking in females. Nonetheless, a genus-level description pertaining mostly to the diagnostic characters of female Melissodes is outlined below. Features of sculpture (e.g. punctuation and microsculptureing) will be omitted from the following description given the high variation and importance to species-level identification rather than generic classification; these characters are instead presented in each species treatment. The descriptions of anatomy will follow the vocabulary used by Laberge (1956a, 1956b, 1961) with parenthesized terminology used by Snodgrass (1910) in his book on the anatomy of the honeybee when applicable. 
	Head: the malar space is incredibly small to absent, this in turn making the eyes appear as if their posterior apices contact the mandibular base, but a small gap still exists. The oculoclypeal distance is also quite minute, always measuring less than the minimum diameter of the first flagellar segment and often half this diameter. In facial view, the vertex of the head is rather flattened and medially produces upward to create a conspicuous bump on which the ocelli sit (Mitchener, 2007). In profile view, the clypeus is somewhat protuberant, but in comparison to many Eucerini, the clypeal protuberancy is quite tame. That is, in profile view, the clypeus of female Melissodes often ranges in protrusion beyond the eye from two-thirds to less than one-half of an eye’s width. In facial view, the eyes often weakly converge near the anterior clypeal margin before distinctly converging near the mandibles to make the inner ocular margins fall along the trajectory of a V. However, taxa historically labeled as the invalid subgenus Heliomelissodes (i.e. M. rivalis and M. desponsus) have parallel to near-parallel inner ocular margins. The eyes reach from very near to the base of the mandibles (although a malar margin still often exists) to the flattened surface of the vertex, but do not protrude above the lowest point of the vertex (Unlike some Eucera; Mitchener, 2007). While tentorial depressions most certainly exist in females, the mixture of the entirely black clypeus and, at times, coarsely punctuate clypeal surface may obscure these pits. The structure of the female antennae are quite different from those of the males described above, these sensory features consisting of 12 segments, 10 of which constitute the flagella. The scapes of the females are very long in comparison to the males, often measuring longer than the first and second flagellar segments combined (although, this is yet to be formally published). The first flagellar segment is always much larger than the second, usually longer than one and one-half of the second segment's length (although, this is yet to be formally published), and in length measures greater than twice its width (Mitchener, 2007). The second segment is somewhat variable, its length ranging from slightly shorter than, or equal to, its ventral width (as in most species) to slightly longer than its width. The ultimate flagellar segment is fairly consistent across the majority of the genus, often appearing short (in comparison to the male’s ultimate flagellar segment) and distally rounded, its length never measuring more than twice its width (unlike those of Martinapis, in which the apical segment is often twice as long as it is wide). However, one species (M. lupinus) exhibits a truncated incredibly short flattened ultimate flagellar segment. The flagellum’s diameter is scarcely, if at all, greater in size than the diameter of the ocelli. The mouthparts, similar to that of the male, lack a thorough treatment, with the only current known ranges being those from Laberge’s (1956a, 1956b, 1961) and Mitchener’s (2007) keys. The latter notes that South American Melissodes (i.e. those of Ecplectica, M. rufodentatus, and M. bimaculatus; see Figs 24 C & D) often have short galea that measure similar in length (or sometimes slightly larger than) to the eye. The key to Apomelissodes in Laberge’s (1956b) second revision states that M. fimbriatus females have long galeae, approximately equal to, or longer than, three times the length of the clypeus. The female Melissodes head illustrations from that of Mitchener (2007l fig. 111-12b) clearly demonstrates that the clypeus is slightly larger than one-third of the distance from the vertex of the head to the apical clypeal margin. Therefore, with the eyes extending across the majority of the lateral facial area (as explained above), galeae thrice the clypeal length would measure slightly longer than the length of the eye, thus forming a small, but notable, range in galeal length. The maxillary palpi range from being 3 segmented (as in those of M. apicatus) to five segmented (as in a few Eumelissodes), but if bearing a fifth segment, then this segment is incredibly reduced. The mandibles are distally narrowed when viewed in lateral view with the widest subapical portion measuring less than three-fourths of the mandibular base’s width and shallowly, if at all, notched (unlike those of Martinapis which bear apically enlarged “spoon-like” mandibles with a distinct medial notch; Mitchener, 2007). The inner basal margin of the mandible lacks a tooth-like protrusion (unlike those of Xenoglossa) and the condylar ridge is less pronounced than the outer ridge (unlike those of Thygater). 
Thorax:  Melissodes have three distinct thoracic segments along with a dorsally produced and flattened propodeum (the propodeum representing the first abdominal segment fused with the metathorax. Similar to the descriptions and groupings from that of Snodgrass (1910), these sclerites will fall into four groups: 1) the pronotum (or prothorax from Snodgrass, 1910) consisting of the protergum and propleurum (or, as presented by Snodgrass, the combination of the first scutum and scutellum; however, this phrasing is somewhat unintuitive and given that Melissodes lack the distinct pronotal separation into anterior and posterior halves, this terminology will be omitted), as well as the ventral surface of the propleurum; 2) the mesothorax, consisting of the mesoscutum, scutellum, and mesepisternum (or the episternum and epimerum from Snodgrass, 1910); the metathorax, consisting of the metanotum (or the metatergum from Snodgrass, 1910), and the upper and lower pleural plates; and the propodeum, consisting of the first abdominal segment fused to the metathorax. Given that few known sexual dimorphisms exist in thoracic structure (apart from the length of the metanotum in relation to the length of the dorsal propodeal surface in females of the subgenus Melissodes), a dedicated description of structure that can be applied to both sexes (with notes of the known sexual dimorphism included) will be given below. The coxae of the anterior pair of legs lacks a distinct spine (unlike most of Gaesischia, Alloscirtectia, and Martinapis) and the arolia is present (unlike those of Svastrina and Pachysvastra; Mitchener, 2007). The stigma of the forewing is often longer than the prestigma (Mitchener, 2007). The fore wings are composed of eleven cells: one costal cell, one median cell, one submedian cell, one anal cell, one marginal cell, three submarginal cells, and three discoidal cells; and the hind wings are composed of three cells and two lobes: one costal cell, one median cell, one submedial cell, one veinal lobe, and one jugular lobe. It is of interest that the posterior margin of the wing along the anal cell is highly chitinious and developed into a vein-colored structure (similar to most Eucerini and somewhat similar to those of Bombus in this regard) as to create a larger and stronger surface of attachment for the hind wing’s hamuli. Given that males and females share incredibly similar wing structure, a dedicated description of wings and their presumed evolutionary history will be presented below in “Evolutionary and Function Morphology”. 
Metasoma: Female metasomal structure often lacks detailed description of structure due to these characters holding little taxonomic significance. Although a publication of Melissodes anatomy is currently lacking, the keys to the genera of Eucerini in North America, Central America, and South America from that of Mitchener (2007), and Laberge’s (1956a, 1956b, 1961) species and subgeneric keys and treatments highlight a few specific characteristics that will be listed below. (however, general morphometrics on all tergal and sternal lengths, widths, as well as female genitalic and sting structure are still undocumented in the literature). The basal area of the first tergum (often slightly less than the basal one-half) is declivous and often becomes largely depressed medially. The length of this tergum ranges from less than half its width, to slightly longer than half its width (although, this character is only reported for the subgeneus Melissodes). The apical margins of most (if not all) terga, including the first, are usually transverse, or if not, then incredibly and indistinctly produced posteriorly medially (although, this is yet to be documented in the literature). The second, third, and fourth terga are similar in appearance to one another, their structures holding no current taxonomic significance in Eucerini identification, hence why the literature is scarce in their descriptions. The lateral parts of the gradulus of the sixth tergum are absent to lamelliform (often cariniform and short to absent in the largest subgenus) and these lateral parts may end in a blunt, short denticle or may not. The pygidial plate ranges from small and U shaped with near-parallel lateral margins, to large and distinctly V-shaped with a rounded apex. The sterna, apart from the second and sixth, are mostly marginally transverse. The second sternum is produced into two distinct convexities (not simply recurved as in those of the subtribe Canephorulina), the angle formed between these two somewhat triangular lobes measuring less than, or equal to, 140° (Mitchener, 2007). 

The vestiture of Melissodes females is extremely variable, to a much greater extent than the males, most notably in their striking range in color. Melissodes range from entirely black (even bearing black in two species, M. pullatellus and M. pullatus), to bright rufescent and yellow (as in M. agilis), to near-white (as in M. snowii), to brown, and many mosaics of these colorations combined. Because each species has a relatively different coloration pattern (excluding a few exceptions), similar to the male description above, this vestiture description will focus primarily on the structures of hairs (i.e. branch numbers and rachis length), the locations of hair (or lack thereof), as well as the shapes of the hair bands on the terga. Across all present hairs, female Melissodes always lack spatuloplumose setae, the hair structure most commonly associated with those of Svastra and Epimelissodes in Eucerini. 
	Head: The hairs on the vertex are often quite long, especially in comparison to those of the postocular and supraclypeal area (although, not always longer than the latter), and usually darker than the hairs on the frons (although, not always). The clypeal and hairs are medium in length or of similar size to the vertex hairs and usually somewhat appressed when compared to the latter. The labral and mandibular hairs range from being fairly short to similar in length to the smallest clypeal hairs, but often still longer than those of the postocular area. The scapes usually bear incredibly small and scattered hairs (although, this is yet to be formally described). The supraclypeal area and frons often bear hairs of similar lengths (if not, the usually the former bears shorter hairs), under both scapes, these hairs becoming directed outward and often overlapping medially. The hairs on the postocular areas are usually quite small and appressed, becoming longer and more erect as they travel to the back of the head and onto the pronotum. All head hairs described are somewhat simple in comparison to the pubescence of the tergal bands, most bearing multiple branches and becoming tree-like in structure (this too has yet to be formally described).
	Thorax: thoracic vestiture also ranges quite distinctly with the cuticular surfaces often being shrouded in such dense setae that examination of tegular shape and mesonotal structure may, at times, be challenging. The dorsum of the thorax bears a conspicuous line of hairs between the anterior margin of the scutellum and posterior margin of the mesoscutum so that when a species bears a dark dorsal thoracic patch these often stay similar in color to the pale thoracic hairs, dividing the dark patch into an anterior (mesoscutal) and posterior (scutellar) regions (although, this line may become entirely dark if the dorsal thoracic dark patch is of substantial size). If a dark patch of hairs are present on the scutellum, these are often positioned medially and fringed with the pale hairs of the thorax (this does not apply if the species bears entirely dark thoracic hairs). The structure of the hairs of the mesoscutum usually varies between two forms: 1) fairly “normal” hairs, similar in structure to those of the frons and clypeus, albeit longer; 2) short blunt-tipped hairs, almost appearing to have their ends cut off. Either form of these hairs can range from fairly erect to appressed and decumbent. The mesepisternal hairs are usually less dense than those of the dorsal thoracic area (when unworn), allowing most of the integument to show through in the medial areas (however, this has yet to be published). The remainder of the hairs on the thoracic region are often non-variable (or at least have yet to be recorded to oppose this), most often structured somewhat similar to the head hairs, albeit longer (similar to the head hairs, this has yet to be formally described). The leg hairs are of interest in females of Melissodes due to the scopae residing on the hind tibiae and basitarsi. These pollen collecting apparatuses range quite largely in structure throughout many species, and due to the significant impact scopae have in the natural history of females (i.e. collecting pollen for brood), the changes in scopal hair structure are predicted to exhibit correlations to the pollen females collect. The structure of the scopae can range from incredibly simple with no branches on either side of each rachis (as in M. fimbriatus), to highly plumose, bearing upwards of 6 branches on either side of each rachis (as in M. plumosus). The structures for these hairs at different complexities, how they evolved, and their likely use cases with impacts of diet are expounded upon farther in "Evolutionary and Functional Morphology” below. The inner surface of the hind basitarsi of females of Melissodes are covered in uniformly dense setae that obscures the integumental surface entirely unless worn (unlike those Peponapis, which exhibit hairs of much less density, abundance, and uniformality; Mitchener, 2007). The remainder of the leg hairs aren’t distinctly variable (or have yet to be recorded as such), and given that they likely present little explanation in the genus’ evolution in comparison to scopal hairs (due to exhibiting no clear dietary or ecological significance apart from sensory structure), descriptions of these hairs are often foregone in taxonomic work and are yet to be fully detailed. 
	Metasoma: While similar to the males in that the metasomal vestiture is exceedingly important in identification (much of Laberge’s keys are based on such characteristics), the tergal and sternal hairs of females, in many cases, are very different from their male counterparts. Most commonly, females bear quite long and somewhat dense basal pubescence on the first tergum (these hairs are much less dense than those of the subgenus Dasiapis in Diadasia) that may or may not be of great enough length to reach the apical margin medially. Apically, the first tergum ranges from entirely glabrous, to bearing simple, short, unbranched apical hairs, to laterally (or sometimes medially) having its margin completely obscured due to dense appressed pubescence (the first two cases often presenting themselves as the most common among species of the genus). The second tergum almost always (apart from M. stearnsi), bears two distal bands, the distal band of which is often more pronounced and developed than the basal band (the basal portion of the basal band often becoming overlapped by the apical margin of the first tergum). These bands are usually composed of a mixture of highly plumose feather-like hairs and somewhat simpler tree-like hairs (the latter structure is often similar to those on the thorax or face), with the former being much more prevalent. However, some species exhibit “scale-like” plumose pubescence that sparsely or do not laterally overlap one another within the distal band of the second tergum. The distal and basal bands of the second tergum may or may not connect laterally. Between these two bands lies an interband zone that often bears comparatively simple hairs that range from distinctly appressed to suberect or erect. Sometimes, spine-like hairs may be present within the second tergum’s interband zones, these often appearing dark brown to black and subappressed to appressed if present. The two bands of the second tergum can take many forms, ranging from being reduced to lateral fasciae and widely medially interrupted, to entirely complete and almost reaching (or at times reaching) the apical margin. The distal pale band specifically exhibits the most variation, additionally ranging from being an incredibly thin transverse line of pale pubescence (as in M. c. communis), to becoming somewhat wide and medially interrupted or produced anteriorly, to extremely broad, complete, and almost reaching the apical margin. The apical margin of the second tergum ranges from being entirely obscured by the distal pale band of the second tergum (although, very rarely), to bearing short, simple, hairs of various colors, to entirely glabrous. The third tergum is somewhat similar to that of the second and plays an important role in the keys provided by Laberge (1961), most significantly so in his Eumelisodes subgeneric key on couplet 21. This couplet, separating out 34 species/species forms from 17 species/species forms, or over half the species in the subgenus, presents 6 different forms that the apical area of the third tergum exhibits; all of which will be given below. In general, the band across the third tergum is much broader than that of the second (or in the case of M. stearnsi, this tergum often becoming entirely covered in short, fine, pubescence with the apical margin bearing a concentrated area of these hairs) and usually positioned closer to the apical margin. The band, similar to that of the second tergum, is usually composed of complex, densely plumose, feather-like pubescence with scarce simple hairs intermixed (although, the latter is often somewhat rarer, or if present, then the majority of the band’s hairs are of the former structure). However, some species exhibit “scale-like” plumose pubescence that sparsely or do not laterally overlap one another within the distal band of the third tergum. The apical area of the third tergum has an extremely wide range in the hairs it bears as well as its length. This portion of the third tergum ranges in width from being entirely absent and obscured due to the distal pale band, to extremely broad and apubescent (although not glabrous), measuring much more than twice, sometimes more than three times, the width of the distal pale band. The apical area also ranges from being entirely glabrous, to bearing apubesecnt but bearing simple hairs of various colors, to bearing hairs of medium plumosity or with the band obscuring this area. The fourth tergum’s band is fairly consistent across the genus, only distinctly varying in color and, at times, its shape and degree of interruption. Generally, the band on the fourth tergum is positioned apically, often of a single color, and usually complete. However, this band can range from becoming minutely medially interrupted (or not necessarily interrupted but bearing fewer hairs in comparison to the surrounding areas), to largely medially interrupted by a patch of hair in differing color to the base-color of the band. When present, this interruption is often of darker color and simpler hair structure; the simple hair structure lending way to becoming rubbed off with greater ease than those of the highly plumose band, therefore in worn specimens, this area sometimes appears bare (such interruptions are most common in females of the subgenus Melissodes). The fifth and sixth terga are only reported to differ in setal color, primarily in three manners: 1) these hairs are entirely dark; 2) these hairs are pale; 3) these hairs are dark with lateral pale tufts. The sternal hairs aren’t strongly hooked (unlike those of Hamatothrix), but, in one Apomelissodes (M. pacipunctus), the long apicomedial hairs on the first three sterna do become curled apically. Generally, the only remarks of sternal hair variability is in color. 

Melissodes wings, while not bearing as many cells or veins as those of lower insects such as grasshoppers and appearing somewhat primitive in comparison, are in fact likely just the exact opposite (although, they are simpler in structure and a true primitive insect wing construction based on fossils is yet to be accomplished; Wootton, 1979). The wings of this genus (as in most Hymenoptera; Snodgrass, 1910) depart significantly in their structure, venation, and overall construction from Snodgrass’ (1910) and Wootton’s (1979) depiction of a generalized insect (Fig. ??). Examination of the forewing presents a somewhat similar structure to that of an Apis mellifera and publications detailing the latter will be used as reference. An important discrepancy of significant evolutionary weight presents itself in the papers describing the structure of the honeybee’s wings from which this Melissodes wing description will be based. These issues will be addressed below along with evidence as to why the current venation of A. mellifera (and subsequently Melissodes) is accepted. Wing veins will be described in descending order starting from the anterior-most position.

Wings: The costal vein is a vein of fairly large diameter that runs approximately halfway across the anterior margin of the wing before terminating at the pterostigma. Basally, this vein becomes a large knob-like structure before presumably connecting to the subcostal scale (although, an anatomical description of Melissodes wings lacks and therefore, the structure of the articulating features will be omitted). 


As stated above, the thoracic structure of males and females is fairly similar, with females exhibiting the only known structural variation, that being the metanotal length in comparison to the length of the dorsal surface of the propodeum. Its undocumented weather males share this same variability, but based on the keys and descriptions of Laberge (1956a, 1956b, 1961), it seems unlikely. Therefore, a general description that can be applied to both sexes above will be given below noting the variability of metanotal length in females per subgenus. This description will be primarily based upon descriptions in the literature with remarks of undescribed traits based on the current author’s unpublished data and observations. Descriptions of the tegulae, a known diagnostic characteristic that seems to be a synapomorphic trait within the Epimelissodes+Melissodes clade (although Martinapis exhibits a similar structure, however, this is likely due to convergent evolution as detailed in “Evolutionary and Function Morphology” below) are given below with notable “exceptions” to the generalized tegular outline (these exceptions are, however, minute). Characteristics of sculpture (i.e. punctation patterns and microsculpturing) are omitted below due to their high variability and little genus-level taxonomic significance (that said, these characters are taxonomically significant for species-level identification); such features are described in detail in each individual species treatment. Naming conventions will follow those of Laberge (1956a, 1956b, 1961) accompanied by parenthesized terms used by Snodgrass (1910). If certain traits lack a description by Laberge (1956a, 1956b, 1961), these structural characteristics will be referred to as the most commonly accepted terms within the study of melittology followed by parenthesized terms used by Snodgrass (1910). 
The anterior-most thoracic segment, the propodeum (prothorax), is somewhat dorsally reduced (often obscured by the dense thoracic setae and its position relative to the larger posterior plate, the mesoscutum) to create a thin and weakly convex curved sclerite positioned just posterior to the head, earning itself the colloquial name “pronotal collar”. When examining the lateral areas of this segment, however, it becomes clear that the term “pronotal collar” is a mischaracterization of the plate’s full structure; the phrase only truly accounting for the dorsal view. Laterally, the pronotum becomes posteriorly produced, the upper portion of the lateral pronotal surfaces becoming rounded and reaching farther posteriorly than the lower areas to create the pronotal lobe. This lobe often sits just anterior to, and slightly below the, anterior margin of the tegulae. A distinct and fairly sharp angle is formed at the upper anterior margin of the lobe coinciding with the anterolateral angle of the mesoscutum. All descriptions of the pronotum above are based upon the current author’s preliminary observations. The mesoscutum is quite large (in surface area, measuring the largest among all thoracic segments, significantly so dorsally) and exhibits no distinct lateral surfaces. The dorsal surface of this plate is quite long and often appears to extend and directly connect to the head at this angle as its length overshadows that of the pronotum. The anterior one-third or slightly more of this plate is declivous, sloping downward before its anterior margin connects to the base of the propodeum (hence why the propodeum is often obscured dorsally). The posteromedially, this area becomes flattened (Laberge, 1956a, 1956b, 1961) and is in turn often referred to as the “mesoscutal disc” due to its somewhat circular shape. This flattened area holds the most taxonomic significance in species-level identification (primarily for punctation patterns), Laberge’s references to the mesoscutum (unless specified otherwise) often referring to the mesoscutal disc rather than the anterior sloping surface. The posterior margin of the mesoscutum is usually transverse to very slightly convex, the plate becoming gradually broader anteriorly as to create a somewhat trapezoidal shape (its base pointed anteriorly) with a rounded base. This posterior margin is minutely declivous, sloping downward posteriorly to have its margin hidden by the integumental seam between the mesoscutum and scutellum. This slope is very abrupt and short, quite dissimilar to the long and large slope of the anterior third. Similar to the pronotum, all descriptions (unless cited otherwise) of the mesoscutum above are based upon the current author’s preliminary observations. The anterior margin of the scutellum is flattened in outline along the posterior margin of the mesoscutum, and similar to the latter, is minutely and abruptly declivous (its slope directed anteriorly) as to have the true anterior edge obscured by the mesoscutal and scutellar seam. The dorsomedial surface of this plate is also often flattened, but the degree to which the flatting occurs is variable; ranging from slightly depressed and concave to convex with a very slight to indistinctly small flattened surface. Similar to the mesoscutum, this surface is also to which Laberge refers when describing scutellar sculpture. The length of the scutellum is less than one-half the length of the mesoscutum. This plate does not become produced posteriorly as to overlap the metanotum and propodeum (unlike those of Platysvastra; Michener, 2007), instead, the scutellum is somewhat trapezoidal in outline (the base of the trapezoid directed anteriorly) with its two posterolateral angles rounded. All descriptions (unless cited otherwise) of the scutellum above are based upon the current author’s preliminary observations. The metanotum (metatergum) is a narrow, often broadly V-shaped to U-shaped, plate with a rounded apex (both anteriorly and posteriorly rounded). Medially, this structure is always less than one-half of the length of the scutellum and cups the posterior margin of the scutellum. The lateral surfaces, of which exhibit the posterior wing articulation processes in A. mellifera (Snodgrass, 1909) and likely exhibit a similar structure in Melissodes, are undocumented and currently unknown at this time. This narrow sclerite ranges somewhat in its length in both sexes, but in females, it ranges much more in the relation of its length to the length of the dorsal propodeal surface. Females range from having the metanotum distinctly shorter than the dorsal surface of the propodeum to measuring similar in length, to distinctly longer (this characteristic, among others, is in part used to identify females of the subgenus Melissodes, all of which exhibit the latter two options). However, it should be known that while this relationship ranges, the extent to which the actual length of the metanotum varies is unknown due the dorsal propodeal surfaces range in length being unknown as well (i.e. it’s undocumented which party accounts for the relationship of metanotal length/dorsal propodeal length). The posterior and anterior margins of the metanotum are minutely and abruptly delicious, but to a much less extent as those of the scutellum and the posterior margin of the mesoscutum. Apart from its structure, this dorsal thoracic sclerite also holds species-level taxonomic significance in its sculpture. When Laberge (1956a, 1956b, 1961) references the metanotum in regards to sculpture (most often microsculptureing), the taxonomist is referring to the medial exposed dorsal thoracic portion (see section 3 in Fig. ??) rather than the lateral arms that are often obscured due to dense setae. The propodeum is the posterior most thoracic segment, and as in all Hymenoptera, constitutes the first abdominal segment that is fused to the metathorax (metanotum + upper and lower pleural plates). While this plate isn’t truly part of the thorax, it will be included in this thoracic description due to its morphological position. In Melissodes, the propodum can be separated into two distinct regions, the posterior steep declivous area and the dorsal flattened area (never is the propodeum entirely posteriorly sloped). While the posterior propodeal surface holds some taxonomic significance (mostly in microsculpture), the dorsal flattened area is of great importance. Given that the relationship of the medial length of the metanotum to the propodeum has already been detailed above, an explanation of the same ratio seems redundant and therefore this section will focus on propodeum-specific characters. However, it is of note that the flattened dorsal propodeal is likely the trait that becomes reduced in females with a larger ratio of metanotal length to dorsal propodeal length as a lengthening of the metanotum with the dorsal propodeal surface remaining the same length seems less feasible than the former (i.e. the area that would become the dorsal propodeal surface in females with a smaller metanotal length to dorsal propodeal length is now instead part of the posterior declivous area). Most females exhibit the distinct sculptural characteristic in the posteromedial area of the dorsal propodeal surface, this being an impunctate triangular shape with its tip directed posteriorly, deservingly being referred to as the “upper impunctate triangle” (Laberge, 1956a, 1956b, 1961). This triangular region ranges in size and shape from large and triangular to small and ovular or entirely absent (Laberge, 1956a 1956b, 1961). Interestingly, it seems as though many females that exhibit a high metanotal to dorsal propodeal length ratio seem to have their upper impunctate propodeal triangles somewhat reduced (although, this does not apply to all females with high metanotal to dorsal propodeal length ratio). The posterior slope composes the majority of the length of the propodeum, All descriptions (unless cited otherwise) of the metanotum above are based upon the current author’s preliminary observations. 
Laterally, the thorax is composed of one distinctly large plate, accompanied by a smaller upper plate and two narrowed hind plates. In the same order as they are listed above, these are referred to as the episternum, epimerum, upper pleural plate, and lower pleural plate. When in reference to the episternum, Laberge accounts this structure as the mesepisternum, and while this is true in part, a classification of the mesepisternum consisting only of the episternum seems to be an artifact of the Melissodes revisionist describing morphological characters pertinent to identification and omitting those that aren’t. Therefore, the mesepisternum will be herein known in its entirety (i.e. the episternum, epimerum, upper pleural plate, and lower pleural plate), with the caveat of Laberge’s publications referring only to the largest plate for descriptions of sculpture (i.e. the episternum). The mesepisternum, as one would expect, is quite large, spanning from the anterior margin of the tegula to the anterior margin of the hind coxa. The largest section (episternum), spanning from the anterior margins of the tegula to the anterior margin of the middle coxa, takes an interesting shape. In the upper anterior areas, the episternum exhibits a round indentation coinciding with the posterior projection of the pronotal lobe, these areas becoming fairly thin before terminating near the lateral margin of the mesoscutum. In general, this sclerite is somewhat convex, bowing outward most in its medial area before wrapping to the venter of the thorax. Posteriorly, the upper area of the episternum is largely interrupted by the rounded anterior margin of the upper pleural plate, creating a broad near vertical U-shaped margin. This margin continues throughout the entire posterior one-half of the upper margin of the episternum before terminating in a sharp angle and running ventrally in front of the basal portion of the coxa to create the posterior margin. The upper margin of the anterior one-half of the episternum (excluding the narrowed area due to the indentation from the pronotal lobe) is somewhat irregular in shape due to the bilobed nature of the lower margin epimerum. The epimerum is fairly small and exhibits the shape of two small lobes joined together medially (the posterior lobe becoming slightly larger than its anterior counterpart). This plate is positioned just beneath the anterior and posterior wing processes and becomes posteriorly interrupted by the same broad near vertical U-shaped anterior margin of the upper pleural plate that the episternum exhibits. The upper plural plate, as can be determined from its effects on the posterior margins of the episternum and epimerum, is broadly rounded anteriorly, with its anterior margin reaching the posterior area of the hind wings. The lower pleural plate is often obscured due to dense setae and the midleg, and for these reasons (along with exhibiting no taxonomic significance), lacks a description in the literature and by the current author. Until a detailed description is given regarding the anatomy of Melissodes, the provided outline above is the current depth of knowledge in this field. The descriptions of the lateral thoracic plate structure are all based upon the preliminary observations of the current author.

Location and Habitat.
Melissodes is a genus of wide-spread and incredibly diverse long-horned bees that resides across most of the New World (Fig. ??). Currently, five subgenera comprise the taxon known as Melissodes (Freitas et al., 2023), and while at a genus level the range of this group of bees is incredibly diverse, each subgenus is somewhat limited in the areas in which they occupy (Laberge, 1956a, 1956b, 1961; Wright et al., 2020; see Fig. ?? below). For this reason, the distributions of each subgenus will be given below followed by a list of state records from the databases that contributed to their mapped distributions in Fig. ??.  
	The subgenus Ecplectica, along with Apomelissodes, is the smallest subgenus within Melissodes, containing 10 species; the majority of which reside in South and Central America (Fig. ?? D). This subgenus, as will be expanded upon below in “Taxonomy and Phylogeny”, contains many species described in the early through late 1800s that unfortunately lack a redescription and were omitted in Laberge’s works due to their South American distribution (such as M. tibialis). For this reason, their taxonomic status is somewhat convoluted and therefore, few species of such taxa have been collected (or properly identified) with locational data attached. While this makes a full distribution of the subgenus Ecplectica challenging, an estimation of this taxon’s range with current (albeit few) data is presented below. Five species seem to occur throughout South America (M. bruneri, M. tintinnans, M. nigroaeneus, M. ecuadorius, and M. sexcinctus), three of which have only been found on this continent (M. bruneri, M. tintinnans, and M. sexcinctus), with the remaining species, M. ecuadorius & M. nigroaeneus, ranging across the New World. The former has been documented from the Northern Tarapacá Region in Chile, along the coastal areas of Peru, and North into Tucson, Arizona of the United States, while the latter has been found from Southern Rio Grande do Sul to Northern Brazil, east to Southern Ecuador, and North to Mississippi of the United States. One species, M. raphaelis, appears to be restricted to Central America and the Southern tip of Mexico, ranging from Cartago, Costa Rica to Northern Chiapas, Mexico. The remaining three species, M. trifasciatus, M. mimicus, and M. haitiensis, are all known inhabitants of the West Indies, the former bearing the only observation outside these islands. M. trifasciatus seems to be found most commonly in Puerto Rico, with other island documentations including the United States Virgin Islands, Guadeloupe, and Dominica. A single representative of M. trifasciatus, identified by W. E. Laberge, has been found in Southern Veracruz, Mexico, an interesting report given the specimen’s extreme Westward range expansion with no connection to the island inhabitants. The remaining West Indies species seem to be restricted to this island region; M. mimicus bearing two records, both of which have been found in the Guantanamo Bay U. S. Naval Base; and M. haitiensis, only bearing one occurrence record (that being the female holotype) stating that this species is reported to occur in Haiti (Laberge, 1961; one male Melissodes from Haiti has been collected by Martin Reith and published to their iNaturalist profile under the observation id 69441264, although, assuming this to be the male of M. haitiensis without specimen examination seems unjustified). The remaining species in the subgenus Eclpecitca, M. tibialis, is represented only by a two sentence Latin description stating that this species occurs in South America with no further locality specified (Fabricius, 1804). 
	Apomelissodes is a subgenus of equal paucity, in regards to the species that comprise the taxon, to that of Ecplectica, the taxon being composed of 10 species. However, unlike the latter, Apomelissodes are found only in North America. Nine species of this subgenus are found in the United States: M. dagosus, M. paucipunctus, M. intortus, M. baileyi, M. fimbratus, M. apicatus, M. mitchelli, M. opuntiellus, and M. sphaeralceae; with the latter two also ranging into Mexico. The remaining Apmelissodes, M. sonorensis, is represented in Fig. ??a by one observation documented in Jalisco, Mexico, as this is the only documentation with coordinates. In his description of the species, Laberge (1963) also notes that M. sonorensis, represented by 8 specimens, has been found in Sonora, Mexico (these points are omitted in Fig. ??a due to a lack of coordinates). Two distinct groups can be seen in the Apomelissodes distribution map presented below; one east of a line that can be drawn from the Southernmost point of Louisiana to the Northwestern most corner of North Dakota, and one group west of this. Two species, M. intortus and M. fimbratus seem to exhibit the only distributions which can be found on either side of this North American split with the former primarily residing in the central and southcentral United states, and the latter mostly occupying the eastern United States with a few representatives in Kansas and New Mexico. M. dagosus dominates the western United States (especially the northwestern and central western areas), with M. opuntiellus and M. sphaeralceae becoming intermixed amongst M. dagosus’ records in the southwestern region. In the east, M. apicatus and M. fimbriatus are among the most frequently collected (the latter also extending somewhat eastward as stated above) with M. mitchelli sparsely occurring in Florida, Georgia, and South Carolina as well.
	Callimelissodes, representing the second smallest subgenus containing 14 species,  expresses a somewhat similar distribution to that of Apomelissodes with its southernmost representative (M. tuckeri) occurring in Chiapas, Mexico. The majority of the species in this subgenus seem to reside in the United States with only two taxa extending past this range (M. tuckeri in Mexico and M. lupinus in Canada). Unlike Apomelissodes, however, all species are found in the United States, including those that bear records in other countries. Appropriately, the region that exhibits the most diverse, and seemingly densest aggregations of this subgenus, is the state of California, with 12 of the 14 Callimelissodes inhabiting this area (M. ablusus, M. clarkiae, M. compositus, M. glenwoodensis, M. lupinus, M. lustrus, M. metenuus, M. minusculus, M. nigracauda, M. plumosus, M. stearnsi, and M. tribas). Washington, Oregon, and Utah are also among the states that exhibit the most abundance and diversity within the subgenus, with all foregoing locations bearing records of 7 Callimelissodes. In general, Callimelissodes seems to occupy the western half of the United States and Canada with the majority of species aggregating west of a line that can be drawn from the southeastern most corner of Saskatchewan, to the southern tip of Texas. Five Callimelissodes are known occupants of the eastern half of the United States (M. lupinus, M. lustrus, M. coloradensis, M. compositus, and M. tuckeri), these species ranging in a distribution that can be drawn from the southeastern areas of New Hampshire, south along the Atlantic coast to central Florida, west to Northeastern Texas and Western Kansas, then finally Northeast to Iowa. It is of interest, however, that all species of this subgenus that reside in the eastern half the the United States also exhibit representatives from the densely populated western half (albeit few in the case of M. tuckeri). M. lupinus is currently the only known Callimelissodes to inhabit Canada, with collections of this species occurring both in Alberta and Saskatchewan.
	Melissodes s.s., representing the second largest subgenus, currently contains 24 species and presents itself with the largest distribution of all Melissodes subgenera. The species of Melissodes s.s. seem to exhibit the highest abundance and diversity in North America; with 20 of the 24 species in the subgenus residing on this continent. Three species, M. tepaneca, panamensis, and M. thelypodii, the former of which is also extremely abundant across a large portion of the southeastern United States as well as the majority of Mexico, are the only known inhabitants of Central America in their subgenus; these species comprising 3 of the 8 Central American Melissodes. Six species in this subgenus, M. leprieuri, M. cubensis, M. cestus, M. foxi, M. martinicensis, and M. rufodentatus, have been documented in the West Indies; the last species representing the only taxon from the suite of these island bees to be found inland. The islands these species have been found upon are as follows with each location bearing the parenthesized name(s) of the Melissodes that resides on the island: Cat Island (M. cestus), Eleuthera (M. cestus), North Andros (M. cestus), Mangrove Cay (M. cestus), Cuba (M. leprieuri & M. cubensis), Jamaica (M. foxi), Guadeloupe (M. martinicensis & M. rufodentatus), Dominica (M. rufodentatus), Martinique (M. martinicensis), Trinidad (M. rufodentatus), Saint Vincent (M. rufodentatus), Bonaire (M. rufodentatus), and Curaçao (M. rufodentatus). Currently two species have been documented in South America, M. rufodentatus (as stated above), and M. bimaculatus. The South American range of the former consists primarily of the northern coastal areas with its southernmost observation occurring in Valle del Cauca, Columbia. M. bimaculatus, however, has been found as far south as Córdoba, Argentina; a very peculiar datapoint as, when omitting this documentation, its southernmost distribution would be either the tip of Baja California of Mexico or Florida of the United States. While it is possible that the Argentinian M. bimaculatus specimen has been erroneously identified given such distinctly large range expansion, the only other Melissodes residing in its area of collection are those of M. (Ecplectica) tintinnans and M. (Ecplectica) bruneri, of which neither sex bears remote resemblance to the former. The Canadian distribution of Melissodes s.s. consists of only two species, M. communis (specifically M. communis ssp. alopex) and M. bimaculatus, the former bearing accounts in British Columbia with the latter occupying southern Manitoba. The remaining species of this subgenus range across most of the United States and Mexico (although, species-level distributions are much more restricted). However, a conspicuous zone encapsulating two states in the U.S., Montana and Wyoming, seems to distinctly lack species of this subgenus. While it is possible that these states are merely undersampled (eastern Montana being notorious for its lack of bee data across multiple taxa), the numerous collections of Callimelissodes and Eumelissodes from these regions suggests otherwise. Until more data become available, an unwavering answer as to the presence of Melissodes s.s. in Montana and Wyoming cannot be justified.
	The subgenus Eumelissodes is the largest in the group totaling 71 species (see “Taxonomy and Phylogeny” for more information) which span across three separate countries. Unlike the foregoing subgenera, Eumelissodes exhibits no clear eastern and western separation, rather, all species are somewhat evenly spread across the range. The United States seems to bear the bulk of the subgenus’ diversity and abundance containing 67 (over 94%) species, 42 of which reside in California; the most diverse state/province throughout the entire distribution of Eumelissodes. 27 Eumelissodes are known from Canada and ranges throughout all the country's provinces apart from Newfoundland and Labrador. The Canadian species seems to be of the most abundance in Manitoba, Saskatchewan, and Alberta with the former yielding the most abundance (19 species). Additionally, the northernmost documentation of all Melissodes, M. druriellus, of which is a Eumelissodes, was observed in the Municipal District of Mackenzie, Alberta, Canada. 28 species constitute the Eumelissodes of Mexico, and similar to the United States, the distribution of these taxa are fairly even. The state of Chihuahua, Mexico appears to be the most diverse of this region with 21 Eumelissodes inhabitants represented by 516 specimens. Although Baja California distinctly lacks any observations of this subgenus, the sheer breadth of taxa in California (as well as Arizona) are suggestive of a presence in this area and the absence of documentations being due to an undersampled region. While it has been established in the literature that only two Eumelissodes occupy Central America (Wright et al., 2020), this seems to be somewhat of a mischaracterization of the subgenus’ range given that Laberge’s (1961) publication described three Eumelissodes, M. crocinus, M. floris, and M. persimilis, that inhabit this area. In addition to the list above, another species, M. interruptus, has been found to reside in eastern Guatemala as well. Only one species within this subgenus is known to occupy Cuba, M. pullatus, becoming the sole species outside of Melissodes s.s. to inhabit this island.
	
Region Abundance
From what can be determined in Fig. ??, Melissodes is undoubtedly the most abundant and diverse in the United States with this country yielding 107 species. Mexico exhibits the second highest diversity with 53 distinct species and Canada following the former with 31 species. In the United States, California has the highest diversity with 65 unique inhabitants, followed by Arizona with 57, and Texas with 54. In Mexico, Chihuahua seems to express the highest diversity of Melissodes with 29 different species, followed by Durango with 22, and Sonora with 21. Among the Canadian provinces in which Melissodes can be found (all but Newfoundland and Labrador), Manitoba is the most diverse, exhibiting 20 species, followed by Saskatchewan with 16, and Alberta with 12. Three Melissodes are known to inhabit Cuba (M. cubensis, M. leprieuri, and M. pullatus) and eight have been found across Central America (M. crocinus, M. floris, M. persimilis, M. interruptus, M. raphaelis, M. tepaneca, M. thelypodii, M. panamensis). South America is home to seven Melissodes, five of which belong to the subgenus Ecplectica (M. bruneri, M. tintinnans, M. nigroaeneus, M. ecuadorius, and M. sexcinctus) and two to Melissodes s.s. (M. bimaculatus & M. rufodentatus). The West Indies, excluding the island of Cuba, yields five distinct species, one of which is classified as Ecplectica (M. trifasciatus), with the others falling into Melissodes s.s. (M. cestus, M. rufodentatus, M. martinicensis, and M. foxi). While it’s inevitable that region-specific diversity is objected to sampling bias, the results presented above are an approximation of species abundance based on current data.

The habitat of Melissodes, as their wide distribution would suggest, is incredibly diverse and, unfortunately due to the extreme range, largely undersampled. From what is known, it seems as though many species (although not all) are mostly dependent upon the habitat in which their floral hosts bloom rather than expressing a distinct preference of soils to nest in. However, one Apomelissodes (M. apicatus) that has been found across much of the Atlantic coast of the United States and inland across Illinois and Minnesota seems to be a sand obligate (Hogland, 2025a). Although, it is unknown whether this nesting preference is truly related to the sand or rather to their floral hosts (Ponderita cordata) which are wetland obligates and subsequently inhabiting areas likely containing sand (Seago et al., 2000). Until a targeted study has been conducted on the nesting preferences of Melissodes, the only correlations that can be drawn to their habitats are those of the species distributions and host-plant distributions. With such a broad genus-level range, presumed habitats for each species will be expanded upon further in individual species treatments. 

Bionomics
Studies of Melissodes ecology have been notoriously lacking throughout the inception of the genus. While information on the life cycles, in-depth foraging behavior, and courtship rituals have yet to be published (although, one mating ritual of Melissodes has been reported, however, this may be non-applicable; see below), reports of nest structure and measurements, parasites, nesting behaviors, sleeping behaviors, and (among others) some foraging behaviors of females have been documented in the literature. Although the ecology of many species remains unknown, a select few taxa have become the center of interest among a few entomologists within the last two decades. These representatives, such as M. agilis (Parker et al., 1981), M. bimaculatus (Banks, 1902), M. communis (Laberge, 1956a), M. confusus (Laberge, 1961), M. druriellus (Clement, 1973), M. microstictus (Miliczky, 2000), M. nigroaneaus (MahImannt et al., 2014; Silva), M. pallidisignatus (Thorp & Chemask, 1964), M. paroselae, M. perplexus, M. robustior (Chemsak & Thorp, 1962), M. tepaneca, M. tristis, on male behaviors, and M. agilis, M. bimaculatus, M. compositus, M. druriellus, M. menuachus, M. microstictus, M. nigroaneaus, M. pallidisignatus, M. rivalis, M. robustior, M. trinodis, and M. tepidus on female nesting behaviors, among others, 

List of known Melissodes parasites:
Phorid flies (Batra & Schuster, 1977),
Triepeolus (Clement, 1973; Clement, 1984; Rightmyer, 2008)




